+++
title = "Start-up lessons learned"
date = "2018-07-21"
updated = 2014-07-22T11:49:56Z
draft = true
blogimport = true 
[author]
	name = "Edward Romano"
	uri = "https://plus.google.com/118036157148722337915"
+++

Notes:
https://techcrunch.com/gallery/startup-truths/?ncid=rss
End Notes

Outsourcing is fine, but...<br /><div>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;You should start with one or two local engineers who build and "own" the initial code.</div><div>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;Whoever is the "gatekeeper" for verifying checkins before they get pushed out should be local.</div><div>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;The outsourced work should be easy to define, not require a lot of creative problem solving, and be focused on an individual section of the code. Local developers shouldn't need to contact the foreign team on a daily basis to collaborate on work or to resolve critical issues.</div><div><br /></div><div>Every press release is BS. Look at what the startup claims, and know that it really means that that is where they think they will be in a few months with no issues. Usually, they are only around 40% of the level of maturity they claim.</div><div><br /></div><div>Find out how much equity has been given away to random advisors. If the first founder isn't technical, how did he come up with the idea, how has the idea evolved, and how long was it before he started looking for engineers? What value does this guy now add?</div><div><br /></div><div>Who is the competition. Don't believe them when they say they don't have much completion. Often they have more competition than they think....they just explain it away by saying that competitor is in a different market space.</div><div><br /></div><div>What's the vesting schedule and how vested are all the founders and other people holding more than a half percent equity? If someone with 5% is fully vested, that's a bad sign. They have very little skin in the game to motivate them.<br /><br />VCs hate to see 25% of the company sitting in the hands of muppets. They also hate a CEO who's an arrogrant prick and who has full control. Why would they invest in a company when they don't have any power to make decisions?<br /><br />options are worthless for a seed company. Often, by the time you can exercise them, you don't want to. The company is probably days from bankrupcy, so who wants to pay to excercise their options? BTW, you can't vote with those shares until their exercised. So if you want some voting weight in a time of crisis for the company, you need vested shares. Also, if the company sells out, often those unvested options are screwed. If you having "bought" it yet, there is no value to it. None at all.<br /><br />VCs, particularly seed around VCs, are mostly investing in people who they think can execute. Good ideas are preferred, but the best ideas are usually wrong. You're going to pivot and hit road blocks. What matters is a founder smart and wise enough to see the road blocks and pivot quickly when it's needed. A good founder will "figure it out and succeed through pain and hardship". VCs are investing in you....and your ability to make wise decisions. What you are building is just an example of your first "wise decision".<br /><br />VCs don't give money to seed startups so they can build multiple products. They want you focused on one product and get it tested in the market. A-round money will only come after you have a paying customer. (That means a contract agreement that is signed AND cash in the bank because they paid you) Even if the customer is small, you need at least one as a minimum. A-round money if for growing something that clearly someone wants. No one is giving you A-round money so you can build another product. Not unless you've bootstrapped your first product and are already making good money from it.<br /><br />No B2B company can focus on selling to more than 10 customers at a time. If you have 30 customers on your target list, VCs will assume that either you have no idea how to sell, or your product is so crappy that you need to buck-shot 30 customers just to land 1-2. Target 2-3 customers and sell them hard...no matter how little the customer is. Get them using it....get them HATING it....fix what they hate....make mistakes....learn. Then, target customers 6-8. These next few can be bigger, because you've probably already improved your sales tactics a bit. By the time you chase a give customer (customer ~#10) you should have decent data, some customer history, and an understanding of what they want and don't want. You'll land that customer....and the rest will be history. VCs will trip over you at this point.<br /><br />Yes, many people have raised shit tons of money with nothing but a drawing on a napkin. Often, these people had connections. (like a bigshot dad or serious friends from Stanford.) For the rest, they often weren't looking for money....they had some exploritory chats about crazy ideas....and then the money found them.<br /><br />This is the next point....socialize your ideas. Battle test them in front of people. No one will steal them. If your idea is truly good, people will help you succeed. You'll get introduced to people who can help you build it, or people with money who have been waiting for someone like you to have a plan for solving that problem. This is where money comes from.<br /><br /><span style="background-color: white;"><span style="color: #222222; font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: x-small;">"Equity will not pay your employee's mortgage and it won't win their loyalty. Some young&nbsp;naive&nbsp;college kids may follow&nbsp;you into hell on the promise of equity and future fortunes, but seasoned engineers will not. Ironically, it's the seasoned engineers who often have the ability to follow you in those hard times. Young people often don't. "</span></span><br /><span style="background-color: white;"><span style="color: #222222; font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: x-small;"><br /></span></span><span style="background-color: white;"><span style="color: #222222; font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: x-small;">A startup is no place for H1Bs and interns. The work is unstable and often so are the founders. Often you'll be told "everything is fine" only to find out weeks later that "oh crap, the lawyer said we can't do that, so now your status is in&nbsp;jeopardy." We had an H1B who needed to show consistent pay checks with no breakage. With the startup running out of money, the founders assumed they could take everyone to $0 pay and compensate with equity for a couple of weeks. Turns out....once you move out of your&nbsp;garage&nbsp;and turn your startup into a real company, you HAVE to pay people. And pay at least minumum wage. Also, H1Bs have a different definition of minimum wage and it's higher. (don't want high tech foreigners coming in and working for low wages) Bad assumption, and the company suffered.&nbsp;</span></span><br /><br /><b><u>Most people suck as allocating capitol.....CEOs are no different.</u></b><br />People suck with money. They over-spend it, they don't plan for the future, they live in the moment. example, example, example. And no small percentage either. Most people just do not understand money and do not have a good relationship with money.<br />But it's not just money, it's capitol in general. Pretty much anything you can put to work on behalf of your interests, people suck at managing. Whether it be money, friends, family, or.....employees. There is this thought that people who run companies MUST be good with money because they are in charge and have grown a company. But I'd argue that, more likely than not, the company succeeded in spite of their poor ability to manage assets. Sometimes, companies make good monetary decisions because either their shareholders, advisors, or wise generals stepped in to head off disaster. And often there are enough successes to outweight the incompetence in management. (or innertia off of past decision by previous CEOs that were awesome choices. The choices that created the company)<br />But there is one area where CEOs have full control with little overseight....human capital. The same CEO that makes poor financial decisions will make the same poor decisions with where s/he allocates her team. The projects they work on, the R&amp;D that gets funded, all if it reflects on poor leadership.<br />Just look at the defense industry. Government agencies had dictated what contractors can pay their employees. Meant as a guard against high prices from contractors, it's real result has been the treating of employees as cattle. They don't care about attracting real talent. Sure, we can build that in a few months using only 6 of our best engineers. But the customer isn't paying for 6 heads. They are paying for 60 heads for a project slated to last 3 years. So no....we don't care about the best talent, we want 60 butts sitting in those 60 seats. Even if the contract is boring, and no one can tolerate the customer....it's a business decision to make more money....so who's really caring if the best talent quits because it's been abused. The quarterly numbers matter more than the health of the company 10 years down the road.<br />And this is what bad CEOs do. Just like adults who don't invest in retirement because they are saving for that sweet car to impress their friends, bad CEOs allocate their human capital to short term feel-good pleasures. The kind of pleasures that keep the shareholds happy at the end of the quarter, and make everything look good on paper. "Man, the Johnson's just bought a BMW, they must be doing really well." Too bad no ones sees that they are in debt under the surface. Same with companies. There is often so much focus on perception, that adults and CEOs make decisions that only make them look good. These are shitty people to be avoided. They lose all of their capital. (money, human, or otherwise). They go bankrupt. They fail to accomplish great things. Sometimes....they get away with it.&nbsp;</div><div><br /><br /></div><div><span style="background-color: white; color: #222222; font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: 13px;">Create a DEV environment ONLY. Use DEV as your PROD. You're first customers (who you should try to onboard VERY early) should know that the environment is unstable. (they are probably free-loaders anyway) By the time you need a PROD environment, just stand up a new environment. By then you should have a better idea of what your PROD machines should look like. Don't be afraid to keep it cheap at that point. (slightly better machines than DEV). Then just do a CNAME swap. When you finally need a STAGE environment, do the above steps again. When you finally need PERF/UAT/PREPROD environment, do it again. Instead of spending $10K a month on hardware, you'll spend $1K at first. You'll also save time on maintenance and configuration BS. (We found a JVM fix for DEV, need to apply it to our other environments......found a metric to watch that is helpful, need to apply it to all of our environments.) By the time you are spending $10K on servers, you should have paying customers and raising an easy series-A.</span><br /><span style="background-color: white; color: #222222; font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: 13px;"><br /></span><span style="background-color: white; color: #222222; font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: 13px;">You will create a LOT of documentation when you create a company. Between compliance, legal, equity agreements, etc. For every person you add to the team, you'll probably add 10 documents. (far worse than the docs for just you and Judy)</span><br /><div style="background-color: white; color: #222222; font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: 13px;">So....keep tight digital folder records for every employee. Track by data and type with descriptive file names. Do NOT screw this up. document nightmare.<br /><br /><b><u>Some good "non-offensive" lessons learned.</u></b><br /><b><u><br /></u></b><b><u>Hunting for a startup:</u></b><br />Most of the best seed startups are created by seasoned entrepreneurs who have been in the game a while. These are seasoned folks who have plenty of contacts and are (surprisingly) risk averse. Thus, they play it safe when building their team. Often the first 5-6 people the bring on are engineers and creative folks they have worked with in the past. Thus, you aren't likely to see a job posting. It won't be until close to series-A that most of these startups will begin a relationship with a recruiter and begin actively hunting for "unknown" talent.<br /><br />So if you find a seed startup that seems interesting and is looking to bring you on as employee number 1 or 2, you are likely rolling the dice with an inexperienced team. That might be fine if you know what to look for and are really excited about the project. But if you are new to the startup world and want to play it a little safer, I'd suggest targeted hunting on Series-A startups. Go to crunchbase and sign up for their email alerts. Every day you'll get a single email detailing all of the startups that have announced funding rounds. Look for the ones announcing series-A. Read about them. Do some research. If the project excites you and you have matching skills, ping them directly. You'll be surprised how quickly you'll be pulled in for an interview.<br /><br />If you don't live in NYC or San Fran, it can be a little tougher. I'm in the DC area and although there are a lot of startups, most of them didn't excite me like some of the other projects. Maybe....you just want to work for "that kind of company". Again, crunchbase can help you here. You can do a targeted search of any "venture" backed company in your area. The result? A list of EVERY company in your area that is likely to have that startup feel. It might feel a little tedious, but walk through the list one by one. You'll eventually build a list of cool companies that you can reach out to directly.<br /><br />So I've found a startup. I like them and they like me. But how do I know "it's for real"? You'll hear those words in the context of VCs, but it also applies to jump hunters like yourself. "Do your due diligence." I've seen several startups hiring people when they were 2 weeks away from running out of money. Then there is always the classic "We're almost done our Series-A. It should close in a couple of weeks". Then it's a couple more weeks....and a couple more weeks. You can also find that all of the advanced features they told you there app does.....doesn't actually do yet. You begin working and you find out that all of the key employees who built everything abandoned ship months ago. Do....your....due....diligence. There are many ways to go about this. The most common is to ask to hop on a call with existing employees. These might be the same employees who interviewed you. Heck, you might even do this during the interview. Ask questions about culture, arguments, how decisions are make, are certain opinions not welcome or ignored. How much do the founders communicate customer and VC meeting notes back to the team? Does the team even know what the founders are up to half the time? or do the founders disappear on trips to Vegas every weekend. Some will tell you that you are not entitled to know anything about the cap table. That might be true for a well established Series-B company, but for anything sooner than that, I disagree completely. If your going to be employee number 1, you should be allowed to see almost everything as you're really putting your skin in the game. For a Series-A startup, I'd say you don't need to see as much. But a high level answer to the question of "What % do the founders share? What % do investors share? What % do employees share?" is something they should answer. "How many investors are there and how many people hold equity who are no longer a part of the company?" are also questions they should be willing to answer.<br /><br />There is a sly trick I've been meaning to try but haven't done yet. Go look on LinkedIn, Angellist, and crunchbase and build a list of employees. If you see someone no longer listed as an active employee, ping them directly via LinkedIn or some other means. Tell them you are looking to join and ask if they would be willing to have a brief chat to share their experience. If anything is truly wrong with the company, this might be your best/only way to find that out before you quit your job and take the plunge.</div></div><div><br /></div><div><br /></div>
